All right.
As we discussed the first model is higher hierarchical called clustering hierarchical clustering is
one of the most common clustering methods here.
We'll discuss it in the context of segmentation and customer analytics.
But how do we actually perform hierarchical clustering in Python.
Lucky for us Python already had a readily available module let's scroll back to the top one more time
and now from Sai pi dot cluster dot hierarchy.
Let's import Dan diagram and linkage a D'Andrea Gram is a tree like hierarchical representation of points
it provides a nice visual and it's the main tool that is used to assess a hierarchical clustering solution
linkage.
On the other hand refers to the specific clustering methods we employ.
Nice.
Now we can come back to our code.
Let's create a new variable called hierarchical clustering equal to linkage brackets are standardized
data as a second argument.
We can set ward as the preferred method of linkage.
This function performs hierarchical clustering on our data and returns the clustering results as the
so-called linkage matrix.
So how do we see the linkage matrix.
Well we'll plot it using the great visualization tool we mentioned the Daniel gram we already imported
the relevant method so let's implement it first we create a matte plot lib figure
then let's set its title to hierarchical clustering danger gram let's label the x axis observations
and the y axis distance
finally we call the danger our method with our linked clustering solution contained in the hierarchical
clustering as a parameter let's also set show leaf count to false No Labels 2 TRUE AND COLOR threshold
to 0.
Let's see the final result
looks nice I guess.
But what does it mean.
Let's go step by step at the bottom of the plot.
We have our observations.
These are two thousand individual points.
Now the goal of our clustering algorithm is to group them together based on their distance the distance
as you can see is the y axis therefore distances between points are represented by the vertical lines
so the smaller the distance between points.
The further down in the tree they'll be grouped together.
This also shows that they are more similar to one another.
Great.
A joint between two observations or two clusters is represented by a horizontal line linking two vertical
lines because we have all 2000 observations plotted our danger.
Graham looks a bit crowded.
Let's truncated a bit so it looks less busy.
We'll set truncate mode to level and set the level p at 5.
This means will only see the last 5 merge.
Cluster levels.
Now this looks better.
Hey and speaking of clusters.
Now we come to the most important part of clustering finding the clusters.
How do we do that.
We need to find a horizontal line in the den diagram on which to cut.
This means that under this line every vertical line will signal the beginning of a cluster
all the leaves which are connected to the line until the cut will belong to a separate cluster
obviously we can cut the danger Graham in many different places.
So how do we choose.
Well there is a rule of thumb which can be quite useful.
We find the longest vertical line which isn't intercepted by a horizontal line from the danger gram.
This is where we should make the cut.
Let's start from the top with the first two lines that are contestants for the cut.
The one on the right is not intercepted by any horizontal lines so it is a possible clustering solution.
If we choose this one we could cut here and end up with two clusters.
This one and that one
regarding the line on the left we observe that it is in fact intercepted by a horizontal line.
Therefore it doesn't comply with our rule of thumb.
We continue with this technique down the Dan program by far the longest vertical line is this one here.
Wait hold on.
It's intercepted by several different horizontal lines.
So no luck here.
The same goes for the leftmost line and the rightmost line.
Okay let's try this one.
Yes.
No horizontal lines.
This is another suitable clustering solution at this point.
We compared this line with the one we have previously found and determine that it is indeed longer.
Therefore it's a superior clustering solution.
Comparing this vertical line with all other lines in the graph we establish that it's actually the best
place to cut.
So we have found our vertical line and this is where we make the cut.
Now we can see that we've got four clusters.
Here they are.
Excellent.
But is there a better way to differentiate between the clusters in our danger Graham for instance plot
them in a different color.
Yes there is in fact the linkage method has already done that for us.
It returned the clustering results in the linkage matrix and in fact it found four clusters as well.
They are contained in the hierarchical clustering variable.
In fact we made the extra effort to hide that from you so we can explore how a dental ground works.
If we remove the color threshold parameter we'll be able to see the clustering solution.
Let's try it out and we have our four clusters.
Each has his own color.
That's also how we usually go about a hierarchical clustering solution.
Now we only have 2000 observations.
However with bigger data sets a hierarchical clustering solution may take minutes or even hours to compute
precisely because it is slow.
It isn't very practical but it has one major advantage over other methods.
It finds the number of clusters in the data.
Usually in practice we employ flat clustering techniques rather than hierarchical.
There are WAY faster but if we have no prior knowledge about the number of clusters we can start by
performing hierarchical clustering to determine them.
Then we can employ flat clustering for the segmentation itself in the next section we'll explore that
in detail.
Thanks for watching.